# Checksum
Checksums are used to ensure the integrity of data portions for data transmission or storage. A checksum is basically a calculated summary of such a data portion. Network data transmissions often produce errors, such as toggled, missing or duplicated bits. Thus, the data received might not be identical to the data transmitted, which is obviously a bad thing. Because of these transmission errors, network protocols very often use checksums to detect such errors. The transmitter will calculate a checksum of the data and transmits the data together with the checksum. The receiver will calculate the checksum of the received data with the same algorithm as the transmitter. If the received and calculated checksums don’t match a transmission error has occurred. Some checksum algorithms can recover (simple) errors by calculating where the expected error must be and repairing it. If there are errors that cannot be recovered, the receiving side throws away the packet. Depending on the network protocol, this data loss is simply ignored or the sending side needs to detect this loss somehow and retransmits the required packet(s). Using a checksum drastically reduces the number of undetected transmission errors. However, the usual checksum algorithms cannot guarantee an error detection of 100%, so a very small number of transmission errors may remain undetected. There are several different kinds of checksum algorithms; an example of an often-used checksum algorithm is CRC32. The checksum algorithm chosen for a specific network protocol will depend on the expected error rate of the network medium, the importance of error detection, the processor load to perform the calculation, the performance needed and many other things.  
